<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:social="http://ef.gy/2012/social" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>About</title>
<meta name="category" content="auxiliary" />
</head>
<body>
<h1>About this website</h1>
<p>ef.gy is a personal journal and testing ground for strange ideas and/or unusual concepts loosely related to IT in all its forms.</p>
<p>Warning: Site may include traces of politics, maths, computer science, handicrafts and possibly even pictures of cute kittens or other wickeningly wute and wuv'ly, dyslexic mammals. YMMV. And make sure your sarcasm detector is turned on and fitted with a fresh set of batteries.</p>
<p>The individual articles contain contact information so you can contact the author directly.</p>
<h1>Public Keys</h1>
<p><a href="/public-keys">We have a page for that</a>.</p>
<h1 id="source-code">Source Code</h1>
<p>The sources to this site are available via git, either directly at <em>http://ef.gy/.git</em>, <a href="https://github.com/jyujin/ef.gy">or through GitHub</a>. To browse the sources it'd most likely be best to just head on over to GitHub. To check out the sources you could also use GitHub, or you could download the sources directly off this site like so:</p>
<pre><code>$ git clone http://ef.gy/.git</code></pre>
<p>The site uses a fairly interesting, custom nginx/XSLT-based pseudo-CMS. It sure should come in handy if you don't want to use Apache or PHP for your next blog - or if you're just curious about all the fun things XSLT can be used for. Additional repositories are available at <a href="http://git.becquerel.org/">git.becquerel.org</a> - the repositores there include eINIT and kyuba master repositories and assorted other goodies. The more active ones are also mirrored at GitHub, but see the individual repository notes for mirror information.</p>
<h1>Legalese</h1>
<p>Everyone posting on this site is doing so on their own behalf. If there's trouble, contact Magnus. Try a /query to mdeininger on freenode's IRC servers first, then if that doesn't work email me. DO NOT CALL ME. I'm serious. Also, use <em>whois</em> if you need to look up that email address or need more personal details for some reason.</p>
<p>This website uses the <a href="http://disqus.com/">DISQUS comment system</a>. This comment system allows you to post anonymously or with your Facebook, Twitter or Google+ account. It will not have your browser contact Facebook or Twitter directly unless you tell it to, although it may inject Google Analytics code. <a href="https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/181881">You can opt out of Google Analytics altogether with a browser plugin on the Google website</a>. It should be noted that this site does keep server access logs to guard against malicious entities on the web.</p>
<p>This site does not use cookies or any other way to retain a user 'session,' although DISQUS and the social plugins may do so independently. <a href="http://help.disqus.com/customer/portal/articles/466259-privacy-policy">See DISQUS's privacy policy for further details</a>.</p>
<p>This site does use the social media plugins provided by Facebook, Twitter and Google+, and there are pages which incorporate YouTube videos. See the privacy policies on their websites for further information on what they may or may not do. Also keep in mind that the server this website is on is in France, hosted by gandi.net, so Gandi as the ISP could be logging your visits to this site as well. As could your ISP and everyone in the long chain of company networks your request goes through before it reaches the server, including things like country internet backbones and datacentres sponsored by government agencies. That applies to any website, not just this one. If you're uncomfortable with this, either get off the internet or use <a href="https://torproject.org">Tor</a>. If you are on Tor, <a href="http://vturtipc7vmz6xjy.onion/">this website is also available as a hidden service at vturtipc7vmz6xjy.onion</a>.</p>
<p>Accessing the site through Tor or instructing your browser to send the Do-Not-Track header will turn off all social media plugins and the Disqus commentary function. Additionally, &lt;iframe /&gt; elements will be redacted and turned into ordinary links. So if you ever feel a bit uneasy about your privacy on this site, you now have two ways of enforcing a safe browsing experience. The site will still link in MathJax, however, if you browse to a page that contains mathematical formulae.</p>
<p>If you have any concerns about the way this website was built or any side effects it may have, just contact me and I'm sure we can work something out. <a href="source-code">You may also examine this website's source code</a>, in case you have any technical concerns.</p>
</body>
</html>
