<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Source Code</title>
</head>
<body>
<div class="figure">
<h1>Gitweb</h1>
<p>Repositories other than this website's are avaiable via git at git.becquerel.org.</p>
<ul>
<li><a href="http://git.becquerel.org">Gitweb frontend</a></li>
</ul>
</div>
<h1>Get this Website's Source Code</h1>
<p>As a rule of thumb, you can always get the source code to things I write. This website is no exception. I'm releasing the source code for this web site under an MIT/X style licence, like I do with all my programmes. To get access to the source code, all you need to do is clone its repository (at http://ef.gy/.git) with the GIT tool. If you're using a UNIX-like operating system, you probably have this tool installed by default and can issue the following command in a shell:</p>
<code>$ git clone http://ef.gy/.git</code>
<p>This will create a new directory called "ef.gy" and check out the current source code for this website into this directory. If you're not on a UNIX-y machine at the moment, or you'd rather not use the command line, just hit Google for a "GIT client" and use that. Enjoy.</p>
<p>Note that, in order to actually use the source code, you are bound by the licence agreement in the COPYING file. You do not necessarily need to agree to the terms in this file, but this is the only thing that would allow you to use the source in any way.</p>
<h1>Other Repositories</h1>
<p>There are other repositories associated with some of the content on this domain. In Particular, there is a <a href="http://git.becquerel.org/">Gitweb frontend</a> for the einit, kyuba and some other git repositories.</p>
</body>
</html>
